# Cheaha Storage (GPFS)

The Cheaha storage, also known as GPFS (General Parallel File System), is a distributed file system designed for managing dynamic data and serves as a storage solution on Cheaha. We provide the following Cheaha storage solutions.

- [User Data and Home Directories](./individual_directories.md):These directories are automatically created for every Cheaha user upon account setup. They are intended for storing essential program files, scripts, small input datasets, critical results, and frequently used files.
- [Project Directories](./project_directories.md): A shared storage space for files related to a research team. Accessible from any login or compute node by group members. Use it to store scripts, datasets, results, and other files that need to be shared among collaborators.
- [Network Scratch](./network_scratch.md): Also known as "Global Scratch" or "User Scratch". The network scratch space is available on all nodes at `/scratch/`. Every researcher has a separate directory `/scratch/$USER`. The Linux environment variable `$USER_SCRATCH` points to this path. Please clean up unneeded data as soon as possible. We will delete aging data to free up space.
- [Local Scratch](./local_scratch.md): Local scratch is storage specific to each compute node your jobs run on, available at `/local/` or `/scratch/local/`, or the Linux environment variable `$LOCAL_SCRATCH`. Local scratch is shared by all jobs running on the same node. To ensure data security, you must create a directory in local scratch before using it. Please clean up unneeded data as soon as possible. We will delete data as needed to free up space.
- [Temporary Files (`/tmp/` Directory)](./temporary_files.md): The `/tmp/` directory is reserved for use by the Linux operating system on each compute node. Do not use this directory for research data storage, use [local scratch](./local_scratch.md) instead. Some software automatically uses `/tmp/` and must be configured to use local scratch. Notes are available in the `/tmp/` directory page.
